Lesson 4: Linux 101
===================
Required Materials
------------------
1. A Debian based version of Linux
2. An Internet Connection

Lesson Recap
------------
So we have looked at the technologies powering CDW, looked at networking with IPv4, and covered the history of Linux.
These have all lead up to this lesson which focuses on providing Internet services hosted on Linux, whilst securely managing the server agaisnt know "Cyber threats".
The word "Cyber" is yet another word for networking and networks comprising of Internet communications, and the devices thereof that provide "online" or "cyberspace" services.

The following sections will cover:
1. Basic Terminal commands and tools
2. Existing Cyberspace Threats
3. Linux Security Concepts: Triage

I. Lab Time: Basic Terminal commands and tools
-----------------------------------------------
One of the most awkward lessons to learn with Linux is the ability to fully interact with a computer through Terminal (known on Windows as Command Line).
Gone is the Graphical User Interface (GUI) of the "Desktop" and mouse clicking to select, choose, and interact with your computer.
"NOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO!!!!!" You are currently screaming, but I assure you that you will survive.

"Why would we ever get rid of the GUI?!" you too are asking, and the response is simple: GUI and Desktop environments take TONS of resources to run (RAM, HDD Storage, CPU cycles in computing, etc).
By removing the GUI we have opened up a huge world of speed to respond to client and user needs.
Again, revist the top 500 supercomputers: these are running Linux WITHOUT a GUI for most, if not all, of their processing.

The following commands will be provided in command form.
It will be your task to try each of them out and gain basic familiarity with these commands and how they function.

**WARNING: in Linux all commands ARE CASE SENSITIVE!**

**Pro Tip: TAB auto-completes commands, spellings, and known/present items**

###Basic Commands Part 1: RTFM
**1. man**

Man is Linux's MANunal pager.
It allows you read the "manual" of a provided command/tool.
This will give you insight to what the command/tool does, and more so how to properly use the command.

Classically on Internet forums when new Linux user asks how something works they will get the answer of RTFM.
The answer means to read the man pages for the command, because it normally has the answer.

Run: `man man`.

In order to quite type: q.

###Basic Commands Part 2: Working directory and how to "move around"
**1. pwd**

Print Working Directory tells you where you are in the file system of Linux.
If you are lost type: pwd.
Most modern terminals will include what your location is in the terminal under normal use:
```bash
vagrant@precise64:/var/www/test$
```

When breaking down the above terminal prompt it tells me I am:
```bash
<user>@<Computer Name> in the folder:
/ (root directory)
	---> var/ (A folder called Var, within root)
		---> www/ (A folder called www, within var)
```
Think of the root directory (/) as drive, perhaps C:\, on Windows, so a similar folder location would be C:\var\www\ on Windows.

Run the following commands:
```bash
man pwd
pwd
```

**2. ls**

Now that you know how to find which folder you are working from find out what is in that folder with:

```bash
man ls
ls
```

ls will list the files and folders for you on your terminal screen.
However, what are files and which are folders?
What happens when you do not have a colored output?

Run:
```bash
ls -l
```

How is the output different?
Now how can you tell the files from the directories?
What happens when you run: `ls -al`?
What about just: `l`?
Finally: `ls -CF`.

**3. cd**

Given the fact we can tell where we are, and what the file contains let's try moving into a different working directory:
```bash
man cd
cd ..
```

Run `pwd`, and tell me what `cd ..` did.

Jumping a command backwards run: `ls -al`.
Do you see `..`?
The symbols `..` means parent folder, or "up a folder".
When you run `ls -al` you can see both a `.` and a `..`, which the symbols represent the working directory (`.`) and the parent directory (`..`).

To change into a named folder you must 1) ensure that it IS a folder (our friend `ls` to the rescue!), and 2) run `cd <folder name>`.
It is optional to have the forward slash symbol in the name: `cd /var` is the same as `cd /var/`.
Also, you can change into folders' subfolders in a single command: `cd /var/www/` will take us directly to the www/ folder within var/.

**4. ~**

There is now place like home.
Tilda (~) represents your "home" folder for your user.

For reference run: `pwd`

Now let's go home!: `cd ~`

Run `pwd` once again.
Where is your home folder?

Home is normally the little corner on a computer where you can save your files and data.
Additionally, Linux can optionally encrypt your data in home, so other users cannot snoop on your files (but it depends on how the computer was setup).

###Fun Filled Fact: You create a mess when running in Terminal, so clean it up!
**1. clear**

Clear will do simply that: clear your screen to a single prompt!
```bash
man clear
clear
```
This is nice to know when you start outputting LOTS of data to a screen.

###Basic Commands Part 3: File and Folder Manipulations
**1. cat**

Now that we know how to navigate around let's start poking around and looking at files.

```bash
man cat
cat ~/.bash_history
```

Cat will simply display a file's contents to the screen.
In the above case we looked at bash's history file.

However, what is the extra mess of the "/."?
The notation of `.` means the current folder, and `.` is the same as `./`.
Yet, we have `/.`...

This meaning of the period following the forward slash indicates HIDDEN folders and files!
So run: `ls ~/ -al`.
How many hidden folders and files are in home?

**2. editor (or: nano, vim)**

The command `editor` will open up the default editor on the system.

Run:
```bash
man editor
```

Why is there not a man entry for "editor", what editor did you get?
This is due to the fact that debian based machines use update-alternatives to manage "symbolic links" to tools and programs.
Editor is NOT a tool, but simply a shortcut.
This mechanism allows for a user to customize their Linux machine to suit their prefered tools.

To change your editor run: `update-alternatives --config editor`.
Pressing enter will leave the current settings, press a number will change your choice of preferred editor.

Note: nano and vim are two very, very common text editors on Linux, and are included with debian machines.
Each can be run as single commands: `nano` or `vim`, but you normally want to edit/look at specific files.

Thus, you would type any of the following:
```bash
editor </path/to/filename>
nano </path/to/filename>
vim </path/to/filename>
```
Within each tool that have different commands/interfaces, so DON'T forget to `man`.

**3. cp, mv, and rm**

These three commands are VERY closely related.
They will copy, move, and remove files and folders from a system and usually the results are PERMANENT!

Run:
```bash
man cp
man mv
man rm
```

Copy a file:
```bash
cp ~/.bash_history ~/bash_history
ls ~/
ls -al ~/
```
What did we do?
We copied the hidden file of bash_history in home to an visible copy in home.

Move that file!
```bash
cd ~/
ls
mv bash_history .ssh/
ls
```
These series of commands moved bash_history to the HIDDEN folder of ssh in the ~/ folder.

```bash
mv .ssh/bash_history ./ThisFile
ls ./
```
This set of commands move the bash_history file from out of the hidden ssh folder to the working directory, whilst renaming the file to "ThisFile".

Removing files can be a VERY dangerous action on Linux, since the files DO NOT go to a recycle bin, but are completely deleted.
``man rm``

To remove a file it's simply:
```bash
rm </path/to/filename>
```

If you need to remove a folder and do not place the proper "command flag" you will get a warning:
```bash
rm: cannot remove 'sup': Is a directory
```
So use man and find out how to remove that file!


###Fun Filled Fact: Files and Terminal output can be VERY LONG
When you ran: `cat ~/.bash_history` you probably noticed there was more printed to your terminal than you could read.
How do we fix this issue?

Enter: `less`.
Of course: `man less` to figure out what it REALLY means.

Less will allow you to page up and down on a terminal.
However, it's a standalone tool, so how do we get cat's output to less?

**STRING TOGETHER TOOLS!!!**

In Lesson 3 you saw that Unix and Linux had many "built in tools", and have even used a handful.
However, the real power in these Operating Systems in the ability to string together commands.

Enter: `|` (pipe or bar as it's called)
Pipe will allow you to "pipe" the output of a single tool to the input of another tool:
```bash
cat ~/.bash_history | less
```

Now, you should be able to scroll up and down through the bash_history file.

###Basic Commands Part 4: Make me a Sandwich!

**1. sudo**
Sudo can be read as: "as Super User, DO: ____".

Linux has a strict line in the sand between user space and root, or administrator, space.
Yet, this line becomes blurred with sudo.
This command allows a program to be executed at a root level, which will give full permissions on the OS.

~[Make me a Sandwich](./01_sandwich.png)

Normally, tools will tell you when they CANNOT execute due to lack of system privileges, and will caution about this fact

###Advanced Tools
There are HUNDREDS of tools and applications built into Linux, so there is NO WAY for us to cover ALL the tools.
However, here's a list of commonly used advanced tools:
```bash
1. diff (lists the differences in files)
2. which (tells you where the binary/executable for a command is located)
3. find (will find folders/files/ strings within files)
4. grep (globally search a regular expression and print)
5. awk (used in file/string manipulations)
6. chmod (change file's mode bits of RWX; read, write, execute)
7. chgrp (changes the group a file belongs to)
8. chown (changes the file owner)
9. adduser (adds new users)
10. deluser (removes a user)
10. chattr (changes file attributes)
11. kill (kills processes)
12. apt-get (Aptitude tool for installation/removal of programs; normally found on Debian systems)
13. ssh (Secure Shell; Allows remote connections between computers)
14. ps (lists processes)
15. ip && ifconfig (lists network settings/configurations)
16. ss && netstat (lists connections sent and received by the OS)
17. shutdown (will turn off a machine)
18. reboot (will reboot a machine)

II. Existing Cyberspace Threats
-------------------------------


III. Linux Security Concepts: Triage
------------------------------------
In CDW 1.0 we introduced a concept of triage: 

Change the Administrator Password and Username 
Make the password at least 15 characters  [citation]
write down your password and secure it!
Incorporate a combination of numbers, letters (cap/lower) and symbols 
Use a combination of random words (5+) that are easy to remember [citation]

Users and Groups
Disable Guest Accounts/Users
Disable Unknown/Unneeded Accounts/Users 
In Administrators Group, remove all Users except the Administrator from item #1 (which is the 1 that you edited) 
Unless other types of Groups are needed, remove any unneeded groups

Disable Unwanted Shared Folders
The ADMIN$, C$ and IPC$ shared folders are Administrative Shares and cannot be disabled [citation]
The $ happened to the end of the share name means that it’s a hidden share.
Any other shares besides the 3 default administrative shares is probably unwanted

Correctly Configure Windows Firewall   
Ensure firewall is active (enabled)
Check exceptions to make sure that only certain ports are open
Keep/add exceptions only for the ports associated with required services
Remove all exceptions to all other ports not running wanted services
Remove all exceptions to unknown programs (these programs may be malicious)
Additional firewalls are beneficial (COMODO)

Install and run Anti Virus	
Run anti virus early and often.
Quarantine (not delete) malicious things for future auditing.

Look for unwanted startups programs in:
Registry
msconfig
Services

Look for unwanted Services or programs
Services
Add/Remove Programs

Install Windows Updates


Credits
-------
\[1\] http://xkcd.com/149/ (Retrieved 3 Sep 13)

\[2\] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Unix_history-simple.svg (Retrieved 2 Sep 13)

\[3\] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Linus_Torvalds.jpeg (Retrieved 2 Sep 13)

\[4\] https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/comp.os.minix/dlNtH7RRrGA%5B1-25-false%5D (Retrieved 2 Sep 13)

[1]:http://xkcd.com/149/
[2]:http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Unix_history-simple.svg
[3]:http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Linus_Torvalds.jpeg
[4]:https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/comp.os.minix/dlNtH7RRrGA%5B1-25-false